Now that we know how to use arrays where they're fast where there are slow we're going to get into a
part that is not crucial for interviews but it's good to understand how they work and how to build an
array.
Most likely in an interview you won't get asked hey build them ray from the beginning.
But I do want to build those foundations for you so that we understand a race from a fundamental level.
So let's build an array ourselves.
Now in this video we're going to be using the class syntax in javascript so we're going to create an
array class even though with javascript and many other languages we can just do this and we've created
an array.
Let's see if we can build one of our own.
Because as you'll find out as we go through this course data structures are simply things that we can
build from scratch.
We can create whatever data structure we want.
We can create our own data structure.
The most common data structures are well-known and are already implemented in most languages because
they're so useful.
But you are able to build any data structure you want from scratch and as you'll find out most data
structures are built on top of other data structures.
Now to get started we're going to create an array in javascript but just a heads up.
Javascript is a bit of an interesting case arrays in javascript are just objects with integer based
keys that act like indexes and that's what we're going to build.
Different languages will have this implementation differently.
But what we're going to learn here is still going to be applicable to how arrays work in other languages.
So we're going to start off with creating a class.
Let's start off with creating a class and we'll call this my array.
And within the array will have a constructor which is the initial function that will be run when we
create this Mirei and this constructor is going to have two data points.
One is the length property because with an array we're able to determine the length of the array and
the initial length will be zero.
That is how many items the array has and then we'll obviously have the data within the array.
And this is going to be an object.
Now what's the most common action that we have in an array was the access to access the data.
So let's create a get method and this get method is going to take an index to actually grab the data
from memory.
So I'm going to just say return this dot data and if this keyword is confusing to you make sure you
wash the previous video.
This data is just referring to this data that we've created in the constructor.
And we're just going to return the data to the index that we're requiring.
Let's see how this would work in action.
To create a new Mirei all we need to do is say Konst new array
and we use the new keyword in javascript to instantiate this or create a copy of this class like this.
So now if I do console dialog new array and I click run I get my array that has property length of 0
and data that is empty.
If I do new array dot get zero index of zero I get undefined.
Well because there's nothing in this object we have no ideas and Javascript automatically has the type
on defined when While there's nothing.
Let's add our next method that is the push method to add something at the end of the array.
So I'm going to create a push method and this method will take in an item that we will give it and within
here we will simply add this to the data.
Over object it's going to add it to the length of our item.
So because we have zero items and the length is 0.
This is going to add the data.
This DOD data zero index and the zero index will simply now contain the item and because we want to
keep adding items if we wanted to we will say this dot lenth plus plus because now our array has a length
of 1 instead of 0.
So the next time we run the push method this dobbed lenth will be 1 and the new item will be added at
index of 1.
And let's just return this dot lenth for now.
Because the typical push method in javascript will usually return the length of the array.
Let's run this and see what happens.
I'm going to say that down here.
We'll.
We'll have new array dot push and we're going to push.
If I run this I see I have my array length 1 data is going to have a property 0 0.
Hi nice.
What if we add another thing let's do new array dot push and we'll say you if I run this I have lenth
of two.
Now with index of 0 add high or index of 0 has high index of one has you.
Very cool.
What else can we do.
Well let's add the pop command to remove the last item of the array.
Once again we have the pop method that doesn't receive anything.
We don't need to pass it a parameter.
All we need to do is delete the last item in the array.
We can simply have a variable.
Let's say last item that grabs the last item in our data object.
So this is going to just simply be this DOD data index of lenth minus one member.
We want the index of one even though the length to because we're counting 0 1.
We want the last item in the data and from here we can just use the delete key word in javascript and
say this dot data at this dot lenth minus 1.
Just delete that item and obviously we need to decrease.
So just shorthand here and javascript to decrease the length of our data by one.
And then finally we can just return the item that we deleted.
So now if I run another command and by the way you might see here that I've missed the semi-colons in
javascript.
Most of the time you can get away with not adding semi-colons.
And some people don't use semi-colons at all in javascript.
Don't get too distracted by that.
Sometimes I forget and it's not really important at least for our purposes.
Let's add a new item to the array that's going to be the exclamation point and I'm going to say my or
new Peridot pop if I run this I get an error saying item because this should be the last item here y'all.
Let's run that again.
And we see that it's high you.
Because the summation Mark has been deleted.
If I run pop again
I see that I have lenth of one and only high remaining very cool.
All right let's add one last one and to show you why some operations in a race are 0.
Then we're going to add the delete method
and the delete method is going to take an index which item we want to delete.
And in here we will have to do a cost item.
So we're going to create a reference to this dot data index which is the item we want to delete.
And how are we going to delete this.
Because remember in an array we'll have to delete the item then shift the index of all the other data
types by one because we want to follow good coding practices using the idea of single responsibility
principle.
Let's add a nother function that does this for us that does the shifting of data for us.
I'm going to create a new method and we do this in javascript using this syntax shift items and this
method is going to take the index that we received here and the delete.
Now this shift items we can create it here and save that shift items method.
And by the way I use the words function and methods interchangeably sometimes method simply means is
a function within a class.
So this this shift items will be a method of my array.
But it is a function.
So this function which is a method of Mirei will have the index parameter passed into it.
And this is where we do some fun things.
We're going to have to loop through the items.
So that's a for loop which right away should ring the bell and say oh this is an O of an operation we're
going to have an index of zero or I have zero actually instead of zero.
Remember because we want to shift items not all of them just wherever the index starts from we say index.
And now I will have to be this Studd lenth.
So I is less than this lenth minus one.
And we're going to increment i by one each time through the loop within this loop all we're going to
do is say this dot data our data at each index that we loop through is going to equal this dot data
at I plus one.
What just happened here well we're saying start at the index that we want to start to delete from and
iterate through it all the way until the end.
And within this loop I want you to take each item in the data that we have and instead of what it had
before I wanted to add the data that is right next to it at plus 1.
So we had an array that is zero and 2.
I'm saying from the index of 0 over here I want you to now instead make 0 equal to 2.
So index of E-plus will.
So we're shifting the items to the left by 1.
So we have shifted here.
All the items one to the left and because we did that the index that we gave it for the delete automatically
gets replaced because that eye is going to get replaced.
Now there's an issue here right because now the very last item in the array that is this dot data at
this dot lenth minus 1 which is the last item in the array will still exists.
We've shifted everything over by one but we've never touched the very last night because we stopped
when I is less than this length minus one.
So this is still full.
So I'm going to comment this out and just show you what happens if we just leave it like this.
I'm going to run the new
array dot delete and I'm going to remove the pop commands for now and in the delete I'm going to say
I want to delete the U item.
So that's index of 1 5 run this.
I get high you is deleted.
But then I have exclamation mark an index of 1.
So the shifting is working but index of 2.
I still had the exclamation mark because while we never deleted it we've shifted everything once over
but we never touched.
Index of two.
So all we need to do to get rid of that is the delete key word to delete the last item and obviously
to document our length because we just delete an item.
We can do this Dodd lenth minus minus.
If we run this now hey look at that length of two high exclamation mark.
Let's play a little round to make sure everything is working here.
If let's say I add a couple more push commands here and we'll say here are.
Hi you are.
And then let's say nice if I run this I get high exclamation mark are nice.
That doesn't make sense.
Let's change this to zero.
To remove the high.
If I run this I get you.
Exclamation mark are nice.
That still doesn't make sense.
Let's remove the exclamation mark so that we only have a few are nice.
I'm going to run the new array.
And we can delete index of 1 which is the exclamation mark.
And let's see what we get.
Then I run this I get you are nice.
Now you might look at this and want to add your own methods.
You might want to let's say in here return the last item just as a reference which is how it works in
Javascript.
But I think for now you have an understanding of how arrays work and how they're implemented underneath
the hood.
We have simple all of 1 commands which are really really nice.
But as soon as we have to start shifting indexes and changing things around we have to loop over things
which makes it o event or linear time.
I'm going to leave this for you as a playground after this lesson so you can add your own things maybe
you write it in different languages and explore a little bit more into a race.
But this video is already getting long.
I don't want to get too bored now so I'll see in the next video.
Buh-Bye.